so we recently talked about
one that is computed after stemming the
words we're now going to look at a
different kind of spelling similarity at
the added distance so very often people
make mistakes when they go to a search
engine for example they may want to be
looking for pictures of Britney Spears
and they type her name as Brittany
Spears so they often spell a name like
Katherine Hepburn incorrectly or spell
the word his seat with I before even
though they're well aware of the rule
when you should use it one way or the
other
there are also variants in spelling that
I mentioned before so theater can be
spelled with er or re we won't be able
to capture the similarity between those
spellings so that if a user types
Brittany Spears we should be able to
know that they meant Britney Spears
because the two spellings are similar
enough and return the documents about
her so let me show now a little funny
example from a different language I want
you to be exposed to examples from as
many languages as possible now those of
you who know Arabic and probably read
this without any problems but those who
cannot I'm going to give you some hints
so I want to ask you can you guess with
successive hints on my behalf who this
person is
Arabic is spelled right-to-left the
symbol that I marked is pronounced this
one is pronounced F this combination of
symbols is pronounced ow ow so there is
a reason why I'm showing you this
example so can you figure out who this
person may be well it is moammar qaddafi
the former leader of Libya was deposed
and killed a few years ago so what is
interesting about this example is that
there are no common conventions on how
to transliterate certain words like this
so this name has been rendered in the
media as mom r mu am ma r or mom are
with 1m and always that over you the
word Qaddafi his last name has been
rendered as G K H 1 D or 2 DS and so on
and then the middle ow
can be omitted without changing the
meaning of the name so that results in a
variety of different transliteration so
we can have the first name spelled in
the following set of ways M fold by
either you or or followed by a followed
by one or two M's followed by an AO and
E followed by an R the middle box shows
you the different options for L that
could be either lower case e L upper
case you know al upper case al or blank
and then the third box shows you the
spelling of the last name so that gives
us a total of eight times five times
three hundred and sixty dollar 14400
different combinations now not all those
are used in the media but I have seen
more than 60 different ways of spelling
this name so if we want to find
documents that contain references to the
same person we have to take
transliteration and its issues into
account so you know the examples that I
showed you so far Qaddafi Theatre and
Brittany Spears and so on you may
realize that the changes between the
different versions of the word are not
random or arbitrary they are typically
of the following form they can be
insertions or deletions for example the
word behavior in British English is
spelled with I oh you are at the end and
then in American English it's spelled
with just IOR so here if we start from
the British version and we want to
convert to the American version we would
have a deletion and then we would go the
other way around if we go from American
English to British English this also
applies to the word ow
in our qaddafi now the other type of
operation that is common in editing is a
substitution so string and spring are
very similar words they have only one
letter difference so if we want to
transform string into spring we would
have one edit operation specifically one
substitution so in the qaddafi example
this would be the swap of a k' with a Q
now if you want to convert sleep to
slept
need multiple edits so I think about the
minimum number of edits to convert sleep
to slept if we are only allowed to have
insertions deletions and substitutions
so one possible way to convert sleep to
slap is to drop one of the ease and
inserted T so that's two operations or
we can even possibly replace the second
e in sleep with a P until you paste the
P with the T that's still two operations
but in some sense the second one is less
likely to make sense because you were
inserting a p1 place and then deleting a
pin and other place now one specific
type of operation that is not shown here
is a swap of adjacent letters so I'm
going to talk about them in a few
minutes but in the meantime let's stick
to insertions deletions and
substitutions of single characters the
method that is used to compute the added
distance between two words or two
strings is often referred to as the
Levenstein method there are the names
for it as well it's based on dynamic
programming so it starts by computing
the Edit distance between two empty
strings and then recursively it computes
the added distance between longer and
longer sub strings of the original words
and it uses costs of one for all
insertions deletions and substitutions
of length 1 let's look at an example I
picked two words trend and strength and
I want to show you how the Levenstein
method is going to compute the
similarity between the two so the way
that it works is that you have to create
a two-dimensional chart and then have
four empty boxes in the upper left
corner and then you start by spending
one of the words across starting with
the cell where s of strength is located
going to the right and then spelling the
second word in the first column in
position 3 and then the second row in
the second column are numbered from 0 up
until the length of those words so in
the first case it's 0 to 8 and second K
is 0 to 5 so 11 times method
like this we are going to first compute
the Edit distance between the leftmost
substring of strength specifically the
letter S and the leftmost 1 character
substring of trend namely T so if s and
T are those two letters we're going to
have an edit distance of 1 because they
don't match if they were the same then
we would have an added distance of 0 and
then we're going to compute the value of
each of the cells in the table by making
sure that we have previously computed
the cell that is immediately above
immediately to the left and immediately
above to the left of the one that we
want to compute so at this point here we
can compute either the distance between
s and T or any other cell for which we
have those three neighbors already
computed but in this example they aren't
any so we cannot really do anything but
compute the distance from s and T so the
recurrence relation used in the
Levantine method uses the following
definitions so s 1 sub I is the 8th
character in string s 1 s 2 sub J is the
J's characteristic s 2 D sub IJ is the
Edit distance between a prefix of s 1 of
length I and a prefix of s 2 of length J
T sub I sub J is the cost of aligning
the eighth character is string s 1 with
the j DH character in string s 2 and
let's see how those are computed on the
right hand side of the slide you see the
base cases D sub i's 0 is equal to I so
essentially the cost of aligning any
string of length i with a string of
length 0 is equal to I because we need I
insertions to turn the empty string into
the string of length I so by symmetry
the Edit distance between the empty
string and a string of length j is equal
to j because we need j deletions to
convert the string of length j to a
string of length 0 and then finally we
have the recursive case so
to compute a the distance between the
substring s 1 sub I and the substring s
2 sub J we need to compute the values of
D for the cell above the cell to the
left and the cell above to the left and
then figure out which of the three
expressions shown in the min gives us
the smallest value and pick that one as
the new added distance so in the sense
we can start from the cell to the left
and add one we can start from the cell
above and add one that would correspond
to an insertion or deletion or we can
start with the cell that is above and to
the left and then add either 1 or 0
depending on whether the 8th character
of string s 1 matches the J's character
of string s 2 so the steady distance in
the bottom part of the right hand side
tells you that T sub IJ is equal to 0 if
and only if the eyes character of Si is
equal to the j DH character of s 2 it's
equal to 1 otherwise why because that
would give us either a match which has a
cost of 0 or a substitution which we
agreed earlier would have a cost of 1 so
let's look at our example again to
compute the Edit distance between s and
T we said that it would be either the
one above plus 1 which is 2 or the one
to the left plus 1 which is also two or
the one diagonally to the left and above
zero plus the cost of substituting an S
with the T so of those three expressions
we have a 2 a 2 and a 1 the minimum one
of those is 1 and therefore we're going
to produce this new value of 1 in the
new cell and now we can continue filling
the table recursively so the Edit
distance between s T and T what is it
Wow we can either add 1 to the 2 above
which would give us a 3 or we can add 1
to the 1 to the left which gives us 2 or
we can start with the one that is
diagonally above and to the left and add
with the added distance between T and T
now T is the same characteristic there
any distance is zero so to summarize the
smallest possible value in the cell that
we are computing right now is one and we
can do this now for the rest of the
table and at any point in time we have
to keep track of which path to that cell
was used to compute the smallest
distance let's look at one more example
if we have computed the table so far and
we want to compute that a distance of s
TR and TR we can have the minimum of two
plus one or two plus one or one plus
zero because there are ours in both
strings in those particular locations so
we have a choice between the numbers
three three and one so clearly we're
going to pick one as the new value and
then at the end of the day when we have
filled the entire table the number in
the bottom right hand corner is going to
give us the Edit distance between the
two words so in our case that is four so
strength is converted to trend by a
minimum of four edit operations and one
possible way to do this is by dropping
the s replacing the G with the D and
then inserting a T and an H there are
other ways as well
so the edit transcript keeps track of
the order in which the cells were
computed and we can use it to
reconstitute the sequence of operations
that converts one of the strings to the
other now people have proposed
modifications to the Levenstein method
for example demorrow proposed that swaps
of two adjacent characters also have a
cost of one and this is reasonable in
fact that our modification is commonly
used in computing added distance because
it is linguistically motivated and also
it's motivated by user studies people
are likely to swap adjacent characters
by accident so the Levenstein added
distance between cats and cast would be
two because we would either have to do
two substitutions or we wouldn't
to delete the tea from one location and
then insert it in a different location
so that gives us two operations whereas
the demurrer modification of this edit
distance just has a score of one because
it swaps st for TS which counts as one
operation now there may be some other
distance operations that can be very
specific to different tasks let me ask
you the following question can you
figure out why the Edit distance is for
the pair's shown here are as indicated
so the first example is why is the
distance between seat clown and sit down
equal to one so clearly based on either
the Levenstein or Damara metric we would
have a cost of two we would need to drop
the C and replace the air with the D in
this case according to some not yet
specified edit metric the distance is
only going to be equal to one the second
example the distance between the word
qe8 th ER and whether is equal to one
which is understandable because we have
one substitution from q2w
but then the distance between leather
and weather is equal to two now why do
you think you would need to have a
distance metric that makes this kind of
assignments to the values well I'll give
you an answer in a second well it turns
out that those two added distances are
actually motivated by the process by
which people create text so in the first
example the distance between sit down
and sit clown is very small because an
optical character recognition or OCR it
is possible to mistake the D character
for a sequence of C and L if you look at
the two they look pretty similar and
very often OCR software will make this
kind of mistake
so if you want to recover from mistakes
in OCR we want to assign a relatively
low edit distance between sit down and
sit clown there are other instances
where OCR makes frequent mistakes for
example the lowercase M in English can
sometimes be interpreted as a little
I followed by a little N and there many
other such examples now in the second
example here the distance between qea th
ER and whether is smaller than the
distance between leather and whether
because we want to model the way that
people introduce spending errors by
using their fat fingers essentially
clicking on an adjacent key of the
keyboard instead of the one that they
wanted to click on so q and w are
adjacent on the keyboard
whereas l is farther away so if we want
not to penalize people for making typos
we want qu e athe are to be considered
relatively close to weather because this
is a very likely mistake that user can
make whereas substituting weather for
leather is unlikely to have been caused
by this fat finger process so we want in
this case to say that there is really a
distance between those towards okay now
another quiz question the Levenstein
algorithm is or similar algorithms based
on dynamic programming I use not only
for languages like English and Arabic
and French but also for other kinds of
languages look at the sequence and think
if you can recognize maybe from high
school or from some other source what
language it is in you will see the
answer on the next slide well the answer
is that this is a genetic sequence it's
not a human language in the same sense
as English or Arabic it is still a human
or a natural sequence it can appear also
in animals obviously the nucleotides
that are encoded in a genetic sequence
can only be one of four letters a G C or
T in DNA sequences so in this particular
sequence that I showed you is a
well-known sequence and I cannot even
pronounce the name of what it represents
but it's something that you can look up
in an encyclopedia of genetic sequences
so the method that I just described is
based on dynamic programming
and it was used for aligning text
sequences but similar methods can also
be used for aligning non-textual
sequences for example nucleotide
sequences like in the previous example
where you have either DNA or RNA
sequences of consisting of symbols like
ACGT for DNA and AC GU for RNA but you
can also have some special wildcards
such as - which stands for a gap of any
length and n which stands for either one
of the nucleotides similarly one can use
dynamic programming techniques for
aligning amino acid sequences for
example FM yeah sed G and so on where
each of the letters represents a
specific amino acids such as hospitais
tor glutamate or brutal mine and so on
in this particular case there are also
wildcards X stands for any amino acids e
stands for either glutamate or glutamine
and so on and the cost of alignments
here are determined empirically they
have flag the evolutionary divergence
between the different protein sequences
for example aligning V and I is lower
cost and aligning V and H and for those
of you who have a biology background you
could probably recognize the molecules
of those amino acids you can see that
the the valine and isoleucine molecules
look very similar where the histidine
looks very different so a few external
demos Levenstein demo is available at
the URL shown on the top and then I
provide you here with a bunch of links
to external sites that perform different
forms of biological sequence alignment
and Nakhla polymer related to this
segment is called knock knock with spell
and okay and okay
it's an aqua 2009 problem by Eugene Fink
you can look at it on the external
website and then once you try to solve
it you can come back here and now the
solution for the knock-knock problem
it's again available on the external
website you can compare your solutions
with the one that was officially
accepted
and one more problem from wroclaw
related to sequence alignment it's the
lost tram problem part of which I showed
you earlier today it's an actor 2007
poland by boris yom din and it's
solution is shown on the next slide so
this concludes the segment on edit
distance using dynamic programming we're
going to continue soon with the next
chapter of semantic similarity
specifically we're going to look at
lexical similarity see nanami and other
lexical semantics relationships